I booked train tickets for my vacation and
found it on the waiting list.  Well, I will
try Tatkal quota but there is
a similar waiting period in health insurance too
which you should definitely
know about.  Health insurance plans
act as a strong financial shield
that protects you from both planned and unexpected
medical expenses.
But
you may have to face waiting periods before getting its full protection.  This
means that the
policy becomes active but there is a waiting period
for some specific medical expenses.  Let me
tell you what this waiting period is.  But first,
subscribe to Neevapa for more such information.
You
can also explore their health insurance plans by visiting www.nivabbupa.com.
Waiting period is the time during which
you
cannot get health insurance coverage for certain conditions.
During these periods, you
cannot claim for specific treatments or conditions.
And only after the waiting period is over,
you can avail the full benefit of your health coverage.
Therefore, it is important to carefully check your health insurance
policy documents
so that you can
completely understand the waiting periods.  So
why is there a waiting period in health insurance
?  Insurance companies impose waiting periods for specific health
conditions or medical treatments
to keep health
insurance claims under control.  This
also keeps health insurance affordable.   The
waiting period helps insurers manage risk
and also prevent fraud.  This
ensures that customers
cannot immediately claim benefits for conditions or events
that were known at the time of taking the policy.
Now let us see
what are the waiting periods in health insurance.  There are
three main types of waiting periods in health insurance.
Initial waiting period.  Health insurance
policies have an initial waiting period of 30 days during
which no
treatment or medical
condition other than accidents is covered.  Therefore, you
cannot claim for any illness or condition
except accidents for the first 30 days from the date of policy issuance.  After the initial waiting
period, your medical expenses will be
covered as per the terms and conditions of the policy.  Waiting period for pre-existing diseases.
Pre-existing diseases are those
conditions which were
diagnosed or treated within 3 years prior to taking health insurance.   The
waiting period for these conditions can be up to 3 years.
Till which time
any treatment or complications related to pre-existing conditions will
not be covered.
Some health insurance products with new features of benefits may have
different waiting periods for pre-existing diseases.  For
example, in some plants, you can
reduce the waiting period for pre-existing diseases by paying an extra premium.
And in some plants, the waiting period is less for
pre-existing diseases like asthma, hypertension, diabetes etc.
Waiting periods for specific diseases or procedures.  Apart from the initial and pre-
existing disease waiting periods,
health insurance policies
also have waiting periods for specific medical conditions and treatments.
Like hernia,
hemorrhoids, chronic kidney disease, spinal
disorders etc.  The complete list of these illnesses
is available in the policy documents and these illnesses may
vary from insurer to insurer.
You can
claim for these treatments or procedures after the waiting period is over.  It
is important to check the list of excluded diseases during the waiting period to avoid unexpected claim
rejections and avoid any hassles.
Waiting periods for specific diseases or procedures are
different from waiting periods for pre-existing diseases.  This is not
related to the medical declaration made at the time of purchasing the policy.
This will apply even if the condition has occurred
after the policy issuance or has been
declared at the time of purchasing the policy.  There are
other waiting periods as well.  There may also be a waiting period
for some of the benefits of your health insurance plan.
For
example, there may be a separate waiting period for bariatric surgery costs or
maternity expenses.
Now the question arises
that when do waiting periods apply?
Waiting periods apply only when the policy is purchased for the first time.
Once the
waiting period is completed, you do
not have to face it again.  Whether
you renew the policy or
port it to another insurance company.  Yes,
but this is applicable only if you do
continuous renewal.  If there is
no break in between and you have purchased a new policy again
, then the waiting period will also be returned.
If you maintain uninterrupted health
insurance without letting the policy
lapse, the
waiting periods will not reset even when you change providers.
However, if you increase
your existing sum insured at the time of policy renewal or porting, the
insurance company may
impose a new waiting period for the increased sum insured.  To explore more such insurance
related information and Nivaba products,
visit
www.nivaba.com or call the toll
free number 1880030933.